The Joe Rogan experience. Now,
how do things like Xanax work?
What what's the mechanical process?
Okay. So the, uh,
that's a part of the class of drugs called benzodiazepine and
they, um, will
they bind to receptors in the brain and the brain has receptors for all kinds
of, uh, chemicals.
And many of these things are things that exist in nature and what they want
that they bind to is a receptor called the GABA receptor,
which is the major inhibitory transmitter in the brain.
So when you have a benzodiazepine binding to a GABAA receptor,
what it's going to do is increase inhibition. So the, you know,
the kind of simple reason why those things can help is
they kind of inhibit. So they toned down the brain a bit.
And so things that would normally trigger a response, no longer trigger it.
So it's like increasing the threshold for something to bother you in a.
And a lot of people enjoy that with alcohol and not supposed to.
Well, the alcohol also attacks. Those are separate. So it's like you get.
Double the effect, right? Is that why they tell people don't have Xanax?
Cause you can, you know, if you,
if you take a lot of sandbox and drink a lot of booze, you can, oh, D.
Or you could just say crazy things,
not totally be aware. Do you remember that story about a woman? She was a,
I believe she was a publicist and she got on a plane.
She was flying to Africa and she said, I'm going to Africa.
Hope I don't get aids. Just kidding. I'm white, LOL.
She thought she was just being funny and you laughed.
And she landed in Africa. That's a bit a surprise. Do you know the story?
No, but there are other stories.
This was one of the original stories of someone ruining their entire life with
just putting, you know, one little tweak online.
She thought she was being funny. Like she, she would say a bunch of snarky,
things like that. A bunch of funny, trying to be funny. Right. Um,
but she was on Xanax and drinking and woke up, uh,
completely oblivious and her life had been destroyed. She was fired, you know,
she was a social pariah and I'm pretty sure that was
Xanax and alcohol that she was blaming it on.
Yeah. Well, you know, these are powerful drugs.
And so w you know, back to how they work and they work.
So a drug like that,
all of the drugs that we take go to the entire body,
you know, they don't, they're not able to just, you know,
find their way to one little spot in the brain and do their trick. There's this,
you know, talk about magic bullet, uh,
bullet drugs that might be able to be targeted for specific circuits,
but that's a fantasy at this point.
So if you reduce inhibition in the entire brain,
yes, you might reduce anxiety,
but you're also going to change a lot of other things. So you're going to make,
um, um, for example, forethought and, uh,
ability to reign in things like the stuff the woman was saying, uh,
more difficult because they're attacking the prefrontal cortex where you have
some inhibitory control over behavior. Um,
they're going to alter your ability to retrieve and store
memories and to be, uh, to attend to things. And, um,
you know, to the extent that these drugs have a positive effect on some people,
uh,
it's been said that part of the reason is that it's kind of a general blending
of emotion. It's not an anti-anxiety drug.
It's just kind of a dulling of everything.
And you get anxiety anti-anxiety as a part of that.
But if we want to understand how to do better, um,
we have to, you know, figure out what the,
the brain circuit that's really making us anxious is.
And not just, what's making us, you know, not,
not toning down to everything. It's kind of like, you know,
you go to a restaurant, the music's too loud. Somebody says,
please turn it down. So they turned it down a little bit.
The music stays the same, the same song, but it's not as annoying, you know,
because you've turned the volume down.
And I think that's what a lot of what these medications can do is turn the
volume down a bit, or turn it up, you know, depending on what you're doing.
Correct me if I'm wrong, but isn't there some sort of a Slingshot effect,
like after you take these things in your anxiety's ramped up afterwards.
Well, it can be a rebound the fact that it can also be kind of a, uh,
a lot of people next day, feel depressed. No,
because they're just the stuff is out of your system. And just come to the,
you know, if you take, it's kind of like taking sleeping pills,
things like Ambien are of the same general category of drug benzodiazepines.
And so you get this hangover the next day.
Okay. So it's just a physiological response to the medication.
It's not that if you alleviate some anxiety,
then the anxiety wants to come back, you can start over.
No, I mean, so I, you know,
I've often I've proposed and in my previous book that, uh,
we each have an anxiety set point that, um, you know,
that let's say you're worried about something and all of a
sudden that gets resolved. I just makes room for the next thing.
So, you know, we each kind of fill that for, because our brain is, you know,
we've developed a brain that has a certain kind of set point for everything it's
doing. And that just makes room for, you know, to fill that, fill that up.
If you're an anxious person, you probably will always be somewhat anxious.
So there's no magic bullet. That's going to take that out.
What you have to do is attack the process from knowledge of how it all
works.
And that requires that we have a more sophisticated understanding that when
then, uh, as possible from simply observing behavior,
because behavior does not tell you necessarily what's on the
mind, behavior tells you how the, the, the brain has responded.
But, you know, just to go back to the, the fear threat example,
um, when let's say I, uh, bring you into the laboratory,
uh, show you a picture of something like a blue square. Uh, my colleague,
Liz Phelps, who used to be at NYU is now at Harvard, did experiments like this.
Uh, and every time the blue square would come on,
the person would get a mild shock to their finger.
And so then she would present the blue square subliminally.
That means, you know, really quickly with the, you know,
something that follows it, the kind of mass that,
and that prevents the information from getting into the conscious mind. Uh,
and so the person, so I didn't see anything,
but if you put the person in an imaging machine FMI
and, uh, image what's happening, that stimulus that threat,
the blue square gets to the amygdala, turns it on the heart,
begins to race. Palms are sweating. Um, but the person has no fear.
Hmm. The person doesn't know it's there. And doesn't experience fear.
The Migdal is not about fear.
It's about detecting and responding to danger in order to be afraid that has
to reach your conscious mind so that you can experience it
as a state of this oughta Noetic consciousness that we're talking about.
Self-involved consciousness.
That's hard for people to separate. Yeah, well that,
there's a physical response, but that your mind's on aware of it. Right.
Um, but when you understand that, that's why you come to understand,
that's why the medications are not working.
They're targeted to work on these underlying systems in rats or mice,
but that's not where we are experiencing our anxiety.
These medications are very profitable, right. I mean, people enjoy it.
Millions of prescriptions get written. We're just going to phase those out with.
You know,
they're probably all going off patent and because the company can't find
anything new,
they're not going to keep pursuing it because know that it's not going to be a
profit anymore.
But don't people still want them. I mean,
it seems like that's a really popular medication.
Yeah. So it'll be like, they'll go to, um, you know, they'll become,
uh,
generics and people will be able to get them for less money and they'll just.
And do with whatever they want. Yeah. Off label, whatever.
Yeah. I mean, it's, you know, it's, I do think that for example,
the drugs that are available do help people because it's important to reduce
the behavioral timidity and the physiological arousal that goes with that.
Cause if you don't treat that, then the conscious, uh,
um, mine will be reactivated by those responses.
If you only treat the conscious mind, then, uh, the physiological stuff,
we'll bring the conscious stuff back, you know,
everything we'll bring back there, everything else,
unless you treat the whole system and you have to do that,
you have to understand the system. And we've just misunderstood it,
I think for so long.
I have a friend who he takes it every day, takes Xanax every day. Yeah.
And he says he needs it. And he says, without it, and he's just a mess.
Well, you know, whatever gets you through the day, I guess know,
I'm not a therapist. I'm not advocating that.
No, I understand. But from your perspective,
from an understanding of the human mind and all the systems that are at work,
it seems like that's really not the way to do it.
I mean, it's, you know, I'm sure that that's the, you know,
in a sense, maybe that's, uh, his crutches were to get through the day and,
um, he's come to believe that he needs that.
Much, like an alcoholic believes they need a drink.
Yeah. Yeah. But I'm not calling him, you know?
Well, I'll call him. He does like to drink too.
Yeah. But he's a great guy. Uh,